Wednesday Journal, Feb. 15, 2006

Oak Park police arrested two men early Sunday morning who had escaped around
midnight Saturday from a maximum security unit of Cook County Jail. 

The two men were among six inmates being held in the maximum security Special
Incarceration Unit at the jail who escaped after a seventh inmate was able to
overpower the lone guard on duty.

David Earnest, 38, was awaiting trial on aggravated murder charges. Arnold
Joyner, 42, was being held on theft charges, and had reportedly attempted to
escape last month.

The escape was the second in two days from the maximum security division of the
jail. On Friday, Warren Mathis, 35, a suspect in the July armed robbery of the
Buzz Cafe, 905 S. Lombard Ave., slipped out of the jail in the back of a laundry
truck. 

Mathis, who had been living in Forest Park while on parole last year, was
recaptured Saturday in Lyons.

Area police departments had been notified of the other escapees after county
jail officials sent a teletype to all police agencies throughout the northern
Illinois region, according to Oak Park Police Chief Rick Tanksley. 

Tanksley said that the first indication police here had that any escapees were
in the village came when West Suburban Consolidated Dispatch Center
telecommunicator James Falkman alerted a patrol officer.

Falkman, a 29-year-old Oak Park native and five-year Auxilary Forest Park police
officer, was driving home around 6:30 a.m. after his overnight shift at the
dispatch center. He had just turned north onto Ridgeland Avenue at Lake Street
when he saw two men dressed in tan pants and white T-shirts walk out of an alley
on the west side of Ridgeland.

His suspicions aroused, Falkman did a U-turn and drove back westbound on Lake
and drove to the Pilgrim Congregational parking lot, where he'd seen a police
squad car parked.

Meanwhile the two men had turned onto Lake and where walking westbound. They
turned around when they saw the squad car.

After Falkman alerted her, Officer Dawn Carver drove over and stopped the pair
just north of the El viaduct on Ridgeland. When she got out of her squad,
though, the two men bolted in different directions.

Falkman said Carver pursued Earnest under the viaduct, while Joyner ran by him.
Falkman then exited his car and ordered Joyner to get on the ground. He
complied, Falkman said, for about 20 seconds, before getting up again and
running toward Lake Street.

At that point Carver drove by and followed Joyner to the athletic fields on the
west side of the ice skating rink. As Falkman watched from Lake Street, he said
Carver got out of the squad and ordered Joyner to stop. Apparently realizing he
had nowhere to go, he placed his hands on the south east field backstop. 

Meanwhile, Officer Bob Ritchie took Earnest into custody on the other side of
the train tracks in the 400 block of South Boulevard. Earnest and Joyner
reportedly first told Oak Park police that all six escaped inmates got off a
westbound train in Oak Park. That was later proved to be untrue, but police,
assuming other escapees were still in the area, took no chances. A command
center was set up in the Pilgrim Congregational Church parking lot across from
Ridgeland Common.

All officers working the midnight shift were kept on duty, and teamed up in
two-man cars with officers reporting for the morning shift. SWAT team officers
were also called in to duty, as were members of the department's detective
bureau. In addition, officers from Chicago, Cook County Sheriff's Department,
Forest Park, River Forest, Metra, the Chicago Transit Police, Union Pacific
Railroad, and the U.S. Marshals Service joined in an extensive search effort.

"We got a lot of help from a lot of people," said Deputy Chief Bob Scianna. 

Police set up a search perimeter bounded by Lake Street on the north, Madison
Avenue on the south, Ridgeland on the east and Harlem Avenue to the west. Power
on the CTA tracks from Central Avenue in Chicago to Harlem Avenue was shut off,
and eight Oak Park officers, assisted by Chicago and Forest Park K-9 units,
searched a freight train stopped on the tracks. That train, which stretched from
near Austin Boulevard to Harlem Avenue, was "searched from top to bottom," said
Scianna. 

Other officers inspected a CTA Green Line train. Police also were kept busy
throughout the early morning hours checking apartment entrances, alleys and
backyards in the area. 

Meanwhile, back at the police station, the one person on desk duty, community
service officer Ivan Vanek, was being deluged with hundreds of calls from
residents seeking information after waking up to the penetrating drone of
helicopters hovering overhead.

"I'm losing my voice," said a rather weary Vanek just after 11 a.m. "The
switchboard's been lit up all morning,"

Over at the West Suburban Consolidated Dispatch Center, the midnight shift was
just getting off duty. When the call came in regarding the possibility of four
escapees in Oak Park, supervisor Vanessa Underwood asked two dispatchers from
the midnight shift to stay on to assist the five dispatchers starting their
shift.

Things got intense quickly. Besides handling heavy dispatch traffic and incoming
phone calls, the center's staff had to make the phone calls ordering additional
manpower for the Oak Park force, including SWAT officers and detectives. 

Ron Gross, the dispatch center deputy director, said Sunday wasn't the first
time center staff had to work under such pressure.

"We've done it before," he said. "They're kind of used to it."

Still, he said he was proud of his troops.

"They did an outstanding job, not that that's unusual for them. They worked so
well together. I'm very pleased."

So were Oak Park police brass, who contacted Gross Monday to express their
appreciation.

"They were very pleased," said Gross.

Police were also pleased with Falkman.

"It was more than impressive," said Scianna, who noted that he sent an email to
Gross. "It's a credit to his professionalism as a dispatcher. To not only
recognized the suspects, but to help facilitate their apprehension." 

Besides Joyner and Earnest, escapees included Tyrone Everhart, 28, charged with
aggravated kidnapping and attempted escape from the Markham Court House; Michael
Macintosh, 30, who was arrested for aggravated battery with possession of a
firearm; Erin Bernard, 22, who was arrested for armed robbery; and Francisco
Romero, 23, who has been in jail for 4Â½ years and is awaiting trial for murder.

Jail spokesman Bill Cunningham blamed the escape in large measure to "a severe
understaffing problem" at the jail, where he said guards are spread thin. The
escape might have been prevented had there been a second guard present in the
shower area, he said.

While all the drama was going on, the person who had triggered the capture,
Falkman, was home trying to get some sleep. He had a double shift to work later
that afternoon.

Asked if he managed to catch any shut-eye, Falkman said with a half laugh, "No.
Not really."